
Title:  Residual eccentricity as a systematic uncertainty on the formation channels of binary black holes


Abstract:  Resolving the formation channel(s) of merging binary black holes is a key
goal in gravitational-wave astronomy. The orbital eccentricity is believed to
be a precious tracer of the underlying formation pathway, but is largely
dissipated during the usually long inspiral between black-hole formation and
merger. Most gravitational-wave sources are thus expected to enter the
sensitivity windows of current detectors on configurations that are compatible
with quasi-circular orbits. In this paper, we investigate the impact of
"negligible" residual eccentricity -- lower than currently detectable by
LIGO/Virgo -- on our ability to infer the formation history of binary black
holes, focusing in particular on their spin orientations. We trace the
evolution of both observed and synthetic gravitational-wave events backward in
time, while resampling their residual eccentricities to values that are below
the detectability threshold. Eccentricities in-band as low as $\sim 10^{-4}$
can lead to significant biases when reconstructing the spin directions,
especially in the case of loud, highly precessing systems. Residual
eccentricity thus act like a systematic uncertainty for our astrophysical
inference. As a mitigation strategy, one can marginalize the posterior
distribution over the residual eccentricity using astrophysical predictions.


Authors:  [arxiv.Result.Author('Giulia Fumagalli'), arxiv.Result.Author('Isobel Romero-Shaw'), arxiv.Result.Author('Davide Gerosa'), arxiv.Result.Author('Viola De Renzis'), arxiv.Result.Author('Konstantinos Kritos'), arxiv.Result.Author('Aleksandra Olejak')]


PDF URL:  http://arxiv.org/pdf/2405.14945v1


Summary:  LIGO and Virgo are delivering hundreds of gravitational- wave detections . BHs are simple objects in General Relativity, which implies we have a limited number of 
spins, merger rates, and orbital eccentricity are thought to be clean indicators of the BH progenitors and their formation mechanisms . From a signal perspective, they both introduce on timescale
GW data presents challenges, at least for sufficiently short signals . Sources formed with identical g.fumagalli47@campus.unimib.itparameters but different eccentric
interplay between spins and eccentricity requires careful consideration . Propagating spin directions from formation to detection is crucial to transfer as- trophysical predictions to the regime where sources are observable .
etection to formation, has key applications in single-event inference [29–31], pop-ulation studies [ 29,32], and archival searches for, say, the LISA
post-Newtonian (PN) effects tend to remove eccentricity from binary systems on a timescale that is shorter than that of the inspiral itself . Current ground-based interferometer
GW sourcesarXiv:2405.14945v1 [astro-ph.HE] 23 May 2024 2 have some residual eccentricity eres ethrwhich
Quasi-circular orbits act as dynamical attractors for the forward evolution of BH binaries [41] for binaries on eccentric orbits, small variations of their parameters at GW
How can this source of systematic be mitigated? We tackle these questions by applying the PN formal- ism of Refs. [ 26,28] to real LIGO/Virgo observations, synthetic 
assumption that eres= 0, we resample the residual eccentricity . We compare the resulting spin distributions against those obtained assuming quasi-circularity for the entire ins
Unaccounted (and, at present, unaccountable) eccentricity at detection can in- troduce substantial variation in our inference of spins at BH binary formation . residual eccentricity is
astrophysical models of BH binary formation [44–46] can be used to heuristically “marginalize” over this systematic, thereby mitigating its impact .
BH binaries are characterized by masses m1,2, mass ratio q=m2/m11, total mass M=m1+m2, dimen- sionless spin magnitudes 
escribed using Keplerian notions for the semi-major axis aand the orbital eccentricity e[0,1). Hereafter we set c=G= 1
We evolve binaries along their inspiral using the precession-averaged PN approach of Refs. [26] We first neglect radi- ation reaction and solve the spin-pre
GW emission is then introduced quasi-adiabatically, mod-eling the spin evolution as a continuous series of those semi-analytic solutions . Initially restricted to circular sources [27,
Ce GW frequency fref= 20 Hz, with exception of GW190521 . We calculate the semi-major axis ausing the PN expression reported in Eq.
Weset e[0, emax=0 corresponds to assuming binaries that evolved on quasi-circular orbits since formation . In the follow- 3 ing, we use
hile Ref. [ 42] quotes the threshold ethr0.05at 10 Hz . We check that our resam-pled values of eresare lower
We make use of simulations of binaries formed in isolation [ 52] and binaries assembled dynamically in dense stellar clusters [ 21,46]. We draw eccentricities directly from their distributions as predicted at 
BH binary for- mation typically happens as separations as large as 106M[46,53,54] If the residual eccentricity in band is= 0, binaries will reach this
eresofO(102) resulting eccentricities at a= 104Mcan be larger than 0.6 . Extending the applicability of PN integrations in the
C. Gravitational-wave signals We consider both current LIGO/Virgo observations as well as synthetic injections . Together, these sources cover a broad range of SNRs and degrees of spin
For event GW200129 _065458 we also consider posterior sam- ples obtained with NRSur7dq4 [57] from Ref. [ 58], which
Bina- ries have masses m1,2[5,100]Mconstrained to q[1/8,1] andMc[10,60]M . Sources
ec- tor performances representative of the 4th observing run of LIGO/Virgo and neglecting non-stationary noise realizations . We do not have posterior distributions for the residual
We opt for the Hellinger distance [63] where pandqare probability density functions of a variable x . In our case, these are the back-propagated posteriors obtained assuming
We compute the integral in Eq. (1) via Monte Carlo . The Hellinger distance has the desirable properties of being symmetric, i.e. dH(p, q) =
The results are dH N(, ),N(+n, ) =s 1exp n2 8 . Some evaluations are reported in Table
ter pfor the synthetic event labeled uni_88 in the dataset of Ref. [61] . This signal was handpicked for illustrative purposes because it
tection ( fref= 20Hz) as well as those resulting from our back-propagation procedure (a= 104M) as the adopted residual eccentricity increases, the back
it is informative to compare the locations of the back propagated distributions against those at detection as function of the residual eccentricity . h emax= 102and its circular counterpart with e
The evolution of the spin orientations depends on semi- major axis aand eccentricity ethrough the orbital an- gular momentum L . From the Newtonian scaling L
s have a smaller angular momentum than circular binaries for a given value of a . the posteriors shown in Fig. 1 are seated between the back-propagated
GW191109_010717hasanSNRof 13.6andisconsistent with a binary BH with m1= 81+13 9M
In this case, we report a dis- tance dH0.01between back-propagated posteriors with emax= 102andemax = 0. Overall, this
Parameter-space exploration We present a broader exploration of the parameter space using the Hellinger distance (Sec. IID) as our sum- mary statistic . Figure 2 shows the values
the distance between our circular and eccen- tric back-propagated prediction increases with p . We find that the systematic uncertainty associated with residual eccentricity
Fig. 2 shows substantial variability, even across several orders of magnitude in dH . This is not surprising given the high dimensionality of the BH binary parameter space and our sparse coverage
Back -propagated 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 p0.000.250.500.751.001.251.501.75GW191109 010717 emax= 0
Dashed curves show the distributions at detection ( fref= 20Hz); solid curves are obtained by back-propagating posterior samples to a= 104M . The dark blue
Contours in the 2-dimensional distributions on the left correspond to 50% and 90% credible intervals . An animated version of this figure is available at www.davidegerosa.com/s
We con- sider 69 real events detected by LIGO/Virgo (squares) and 100 synthetic signals (circles) Diamonds mark results ob-tained using the posteriors samples of
(higher) SNR tend to have larger (smaller) values of dH, corresponding to the regime where statistical systematic uncertainties dominate the error budget . We now present a more motivated strategy
ch makes direct use of state-of-the-art population-synthesis predictions . We interpret thisasan „astrophysicalmarginalization” overtheresidual eccentricity 
ictions obtained with Rapster [46] and CMC[45] are two of the cur- rent state-of-the-art cluster codes in the field . These are compared against
TheRapster population is generated based on the assumptions detailed in Sec. III. A of Ref. [ 65]. For Star- Track, we use the population referred to as “default model
e ejected, in-cluster and GW capture sub-channels respectively . For Rapster andStarTrack populations, eccentric-ity and spin distributions are provided at BH
This is consistent with the injections from Ref. [ 43] intro duced in Sec. IIC . This results in a set of weights pdetfor each source in our 
Figure 3 shows the resulting residual eccentricities at fref= 10Hz . The distributions predicted for each forma-tion (sub)channel are quite distinct . Predictions from the two populations
Numbers in parenthesis refer to sources with eres ethr= 0.05 . 1010108106104102100 .10.20.3
Distributions related to three sub-channels within the two dynamically formed populations are shown in blue for ejected binaries merging outside the cluster . red for binaries formed via GW capture
eft mark systems with eccentricity larger than the resolvability threshold set to ethr=0.05 . Bina-ries are weighted by their GW detectability .
We truncate the distributions of Fig. 3 to eethr0.05, which mimics a scenario where highly eccentric sources can be identified as such . Note that
Figure 4 shows results for the same software injection considered in top panels of Fig. 1 . We first propagate the GW posteriors forward from fref= 20Hz (where the injections were
Figure 4 shows the same trends highlighted in Sec. IIIA . distributions with the lowest (largest) residual eccentricity such as iso- lated binaries (GW captures) have back
our predictions sit close to the distributions for the ejected and in-cluster sub-channels . the procedure we present heavily relies on the adopted astrophysical population .
our results do not capture correlations between the residual eccentricity and the other parameters (say the masses or the spins) of the back-propagated signal . We envision this approach to be used in
the key observables in GW astronomy are time dependent, i.e. theirvalueschange, sometimesignificantly, as sources inspiral . Capturing their coupled
lly reported as compatibile with binaries on quasi-circular orbits . Eccentricity and spin inclinations are coupled [ 26] and mismodeling in the latter at detection translates into
Back-propagated posteriors of spin directions assuming astrophyically motivated distributions of residual eccentricity . Dashed curves show distributions at detection ( fref= 20Hz) while
Contours in the 2-dimensional distributions correspond to 50% and 90% credible intervals . We show predictions from individual sub-channels (blue, orange, green) and a joint predictions that keeps
stribution from StarTrack (red) are virtually indistinguishable from those obtained with the ejected subchannel (blue)
this effect is indeed due to couplings between the precession and eccentricity sectors of the BH dynamics . the systematic uncertainty due to residual eccentricity is subdominantcomparedtothestatistical
features in the inferred population of the BH spins are used to constrain specific mechanisms behind the assembly of BH binaries such as supernova kicks, tidal interactions, mass transfer
binaries have been back-propagated to past time infinity (i.e. fref= 0Hz)assuming quasi-circular or- bits[29,30,32]. The
Residual eccentricity might also impact archival searches of stellar-mass BH binaries in LISA data . It has been argued that ground-based detections of merging bin
this paper shows that residual eccentricity is an important caveat to this statement . The uncertainty is further exacerbated by the known degener- acy between eccentricity and time to merger .
BH spin directions relies on pre-computed astrophysical distributions . eres=0 for all posterior samples of all the events as has been done so far .
